[Applause]
well thank you and as you were reading
the sword version of my my biography we
said I don't know always feels kind of
long I was thinking as I was looking at
that that slide the picture of the front
of the college just thinking about how
continuous everything is with being a
student here you you know hearing all
that I don't naturally I'm reflecting
what was it about University of Toronto
but really especially about University
College you know kind of that made me
who I am and I have to say it was really
my experience here that did make me who
I am and I'm very very moved in this
room I don't think existed exactly 90%
of my time was spent in the junior
common room which I would really
attribute to encouraging outside the box
thinking I was very lucky to come here
with a lot of talented people were here
at the time of just and so the idea that
university education is something that
you do yourself not something good
teachers do for you that was pretty much
a prevalent notion at that time I guess
one of the highlights I think it's nice
to reminisce I presume of quite a few of
you are alums as I am was when one of
the members you know and these were also
days where a kind of Student Government
was kind of like Tammany Hall you know
was modeled on that kind of that kind of
model so somebody who was in student
government I was busy circulating a
petition to stop the war in Vietnam in
the in the in the new cafeteria which is
now it's now a museum it's now the the
Art Center that's right which we planned
after thank you for that let me plant
that arts hitter and he came up to me
and said you know we think that you
could be a very good culture director
for the art the lit rag which is the
student government body I think probably
didn't it was so counter cultural I
don't think I knew that there even was
such a thing and I was just totally
shocked to be asked to do something that
seemed a little bit mainstream to me but
I said well if you think if you think I
do a good job you can
put my name up for election and indeed I
got elected and that was very nice
because it means that my name is in gold
up there in the JCR and I used to go
because I changed my name and I got
married which is a very interesting
thing the kind of moment of passion I
guess but you know to find my name and
of course I was looking for Gaylord and
I didn't look for Gayle Dexter it took
me a long time to find it but my
daughter was also on the led and my son
came here as well and the first thing
that I did one of the things that I did
given that tremendous position is they
had a financial surplus they had money
they had tons of money so I proposed and
it was accepted to do something called
the pop art festival and I don't know if
anybody here went to that but it was it
was really quite huge Bob Bray who
succeeded me in that position on the let
the next year did one there was a couple
more after that and and to give you an
idea Judy there was were the days when
you could invite the Minister of Culture
to open a pop art festival and Judy
Lamar she accepted and Junie lamarche
opened the festival and it was quite
hilarious we we had a great time we
turned that that was then really a
horrible cafeteria where people from
nameless nameless high schools played
bridge all day and as opposed to people
and the JCR who did other things all day
and they and we turned it into a we sort
of you know Andy Warhol was very big
with the soup cans and all that we
turned it into a into into a supermarket
it actually turned the whole space into
a supermarket was tremendous and and
that was it that that's a great memory
so what did I learn from that I learned
that if you had great ideas people would
let you implement them now that's a
simple-minded kind of thing to learn but
that is the story of this crazy company
that my husband and I set up called Lord
cultural resources what we've learned is
that when you have a very good idea
that's really rooted in people's culture
they'll make them happen and of course
the Human Rights Museum in Ottawa
example in Canada and there there are
many around the world I'll talk about a
few of them so I could reminisce all
night but I don't think I will just say
that this was I'm sure it still is Oh
France well I took the past course you
had to do past courses so I took the
past course in French and my first year
at UC at that time it was a UC course it
was probably one of the the only ones
that that were actually that in my
program I was in history there was
delivered here at UC and I don't know it
was maybe good enough in French to have
a Paris office I could say some other
things about that and to be given this
incredible honor by the French
government and everything everything you
said thank you really comes back to UC
so I would encourage everybody to fully
appreciate this wonderful College so
today I'm going to talk about this this
subject that interests me a lot after
all University of Toronto is a great
university that exists in the heart of a
great city now you know Toronto had only
300,000 people I mean the whole city
when I went to university it was not
exactly a great city but was a pretty
good City it was not yet I graduated in
68 and we hadn't yet come to 1970 which
was the turning point at which in a way
Montreal moved to Toronto I think that
that's another Canadian story was a
small city but being one of those
universities that is in the heart of
downtown
I think indelibly made everyone aware
that culture and cities are very
connected you could go to many great
universities in the United States
including Harvard pretty much so many of
them and never get the idea that the
city makes a difference but that notion
is completely ingrained here and so this
whole relationship between cities and
museums and soft power has intrigued me
for some time and a couple of years ago
I got a chance to write the book and and
now the book exists it's not even a year
old so I'm not going to go into these
are where our offices are yes
don't have to you kind of explained that
this the map shows pretty much the dark
blue is where we've done projects
I think the multicultural character of
Toronto and at this university always
makes you think beyond the four walls of
Anglo Canada I would say that that's
really the big lesson of coming here and
anyway that that's that piece so I also
was very privileged at University of
Toronto to have great professors I was
in you know I studied history here and I
mean some of the the total grades where
we're teaching here at that time and
some of them are still very good friends
of mine I'm very proud to say that
Natalie Davis who's considered to be one
of the great historians in the world and
has won that prize is still a friend I
we see each other about every three
months and have done so for many years
so the people I studied with had a huge
impact on on my way of thinking
and so one of the things that burying my
husband whose name I I took and I
informing the company really think about
a lot is what is culture anyway what is
it and this is the definition that that
we think is an important definition
because it's stress is not the objects
but the human process and it really
informs our way of thinking about about
culture which is the production of
meaning right it's a production of
meaning and so one thing becomes next
most interesting is why does it change
and why does it change so quickly right
and somebody who organizes a pop art
festival that that's a kind of normal
thing to think about is why is pop art
one year abstract expressionism another
year formalism another decade what
causes this change this constant change
in culture and why is it just leaping to
now which i think is what we're all
living for now is why is culture today
changing more rapidly than ever before
there might be some historians here who
would take issue with that and then we
can have a discussion in the question
period but it is tremendously rapid and
I'm proposing in this book that there
really are a couple of reasons
one of course is the growth of cities
and the other is has to do with
technology I'm going to talk about the
growth of cities aspect of things
tonight hmm so I think you're pretty
familiar that cities are growing they're
growing everywhere Toronto is going to
be a very very big city in another ten
years and we have to be ready for that
half the world's population live in
cities which is a very big change by the
way eighty five percent of the Canadian
population lives in cities so we are a
highly urbanized society but when but
for example China it's just barely 50
percent you know we think you know that
the people why are they building so many
cities well they're building a lot of
cities because they look at the advanced
world we have an office in mom
in Beijing so I'm pretty aware of some
of the thinking there they see advanced
countries and they think well why are
they advanced oh people don't live in
backward countries sighs they live in
sophisticated cities so we must build
cities so they build some cities that
work and they build a number of cities
that are ghost cities no one really
wants to live there and they don't work
out so well but but that's that that
kind of goes with the territory after
all Elliot Lake didn't work out so well
and we have a some cities like Fort
McMurray that aren't working so well
today I'm not trying I just think we
have to have a sense of proportionality
about these issues but the thing that
the statistic that's really interesting
is that 80% of global GDP is produced in
cities now that is really a crazy shift
because certainly when I was studying
actually I was setting economic history
not just history economic historians
look we were studying it was all about
industry and industry is located where
you have the transportation and the raw
materials basically where the raw
materials are is where the industry is
and our cities the cities that are
growing are about a different kind of
raw material they're about intellectual
raw material they're about what we now
call the knowledge economy and and this
kind of urbanization that is leading to
this exponential kind of economic growth
is very very dependent on what's called
the knowledge economy I'm sure you're
all a little tired of hearing about it
but a university like the University of
Toronto well particularly a great
research university like this one is an
enormous support for the knowledge
economy and if you look this is very
striking by the way the University of
Toronto plus all of the hospitals along
University Avenue have the brainpower a
brainpower in downtown Toronto and I
would throw in Queen's Park - that is
really almost unparalleled in North
America it is astonishing it is huge and
that means that I know people I question
some of aspects of Mars but the idea of
the R&D come
opponent the idea that you bring the
biotech and the intellectual on the
creative and the artist together these
are very very important building blocks
for a successful economy in our own city
so the next slide and a little time I
will speed up a little bit if talks
about how does this economy change
people we're different people I'm I'm I
don't know what would I say my
generation people graduated 68 69 70 and
about there we were like the Canaries in
the you know we were we were the
harbingers of the of the age that we're
now living in students here today are
the harbingers of the next stage that I
don't pretend to understand but I do
understand how the knowledge economy has
changed us as people the knowledge
economy includes
all this you know science engineering
R&D finance of course Wall Street you
have Dulles excuse me Bay Street you
know you go down University and base
streets pretty much close in there
that's all part of this and very closely
located remember if we think about New
York which is a much bigger city it's
really only NYU that's downtown yet you
know Columbia is somewhere else pretty
much detached the way in which
University of Toronto and Ryerson and
you know at George Brown to are all
co-located all these brains it's really
very significant I think we probably
don't pay enough attention to it music
culture design law a hundred years ago
these professions I just didn't all
professions these these types of jobs
comprised about 10% of the economy this
is basically Richard Florida land who is
not surprisingly at the University of
Toronto here we are today
it's almost 50% almost not quite and
what's interesting is that Toronto
itself is about 45 percent very very
high the percentage of knowledge workers
it's right up there with two other
interesting cities Amsterdam also very
high Singapore also very high New York
is actually
lower it's about 35% if we could I think
that one of the reasons why we do so
well on that index is because we have
had rather enlightened immigration
policies
now the demands of the knowledge economy
are pretty interesting in terms of the
workforce and here we are at the
University which has two and I'm gonna
get to museums but university is what's
inspiring me today in the past this is a
list you can read the list I love these
lists you're gonna get another one
this is like in the past this is what
mattered this is what a worker had to be
able to be and do and then today or
tomorrow like today tomorrow this is
what workers what really matters so it's
pretty obvious physical strength that's
you know my husband grew up in Hamilton
that physical strength you didn't have
that he was he was volatile at truvy the
knowledge worker right first person and
his family to go to university but today
it's intellectual strength follow orders
even you know when we were at university
that was what the whole rebellion of the
60s was in a way about we you know we
were growing up in a system of high
school in public school which was which
really taught you how to follow orders
and yet the economy that was in the
process of change really was going to
demand that we be leaders you don't
always know it you know but it's there
it's it's in the ether and on you know
organized everything is organized now
it's all about the individual a friend
of mine who look at sharing an office
with we're thinking of reopening our
London office which is a whole big story
why we closed it in the first place
which we shouldn't have done said that
their London is projecting that in 10
years 50 percent of the people who work
in London will be freelancers now I
think that's a kind of a scary thing
means that they won't have normal jobs
and so that means different kinds of
offices different kinds of more coffee
shops to do your work in I'm not sure
what it means
so again and I'll just come down maybe
one of the most important things is
centralized organizations that's how we
I p.m. think right and now networks
everything is around networks even
within the university there's a tendency
to look at networks rather
you still need a monolithic organization
but it's networks within them so the
knowledge economy has changed an
enormous number of things and all those
things have an impact on museums so
that's really where we're getting to now
which is the next list is that museums
need to change some wants to change
others prefer not to change and I guess
I don't know if that can be said about
universities too but certainly we landed
in a field that has its own special
resistance to change so in the past
music museums were very isolated I think
I can remember going to the world
Ontario Museum as a kid I liked it it
was this this quiet place you know you
hushed voices there were many nice
things about it by the way that I liked
like it was free right that was one of
the good parts of it then but today
they're more collaborative I don't want
to necessarily go through all of these
but that one of the bigger changes is
they used to be completely object
centered what was the museum it was a
place where there were objects and they
had a label on the label just gave you
this basic information but today their
visitor centered and that that changes
everything it means that they have to
use technology it means that they have
events and activities and and so on I
think that the most important from the
point of view of this talk are the last
two they used to be sleeping giants
they're all big I mean are all big but
they're mainly big they mainly have big
property and they were mainly pretty
sleepy and today museums are expected to
be city builders they're supposed to be
part of urban regeneration building
cities building consciousness and all of
that and then I'm going to talk about
the last one is that they were
definitely remnants of hard power I have
a slide about that I hope it's next and
now they're slowly becoming eight
engines of soft power so what do I mean
if I say museums were agents of hard
power well this is a photograph of the
famous elgin marbles at the british
museum
which are very disputed do they really
own them should they return them the
point is that most of the historic
collections of most museums not all were
trophies of war or they were plundered
from colonial internal you know war
against Aboriginal and indigenous people
right or they were the records of great
men excluding women children minorities
and all those other people and so that
is the way in which museums were agents
of hard power and our museum especially
the Royal Ontario Museum that's a big
part of its inheritance to the degree
that the church reinforced the hard
power of colonialism in China that is
where those Chinese collections mainly
came from look very glad that they I'm
sure they were legal day with legally
purchased and acquired but they are
still part of that hard power equation
so it's not easy to overcome an
inheritance like that the big Universal
museums struggle with that they're proud
of their collections public likes to
come and see them and they they like to
justify why they should be where they
are because there are always you know
every day in every way or countries of
origin are often asking for them back
but now there is a tendency for museums
to reflect soft power and I think
somewhere here I do yeah that's what
soft power is it's the ability to
influence and attract and change agenda
and persuade so museums are becoming
part of the world of persuasion now
clearly this National Museum that I've
spent 14 years of my life working on I'm
very proud of it people it's really
fantastic I know everyone in Toronto
thinks it should be built in Toronto but
there's reasons why it had to be in
Winnipeg it's a it is this is the Canada
Hall but it's it is it's an example of a
museum that was created around an idea
and increasingly there are museums
created not around historic collections
but around ideas and then collections
are brought in in support of those ideas
so and this move toward soft-power has
really been part of a a kind of
evolution of museums where you know they
were first you know they were a
collection of objects and about I want
to say 30 years ago maybe 35 the idea
that museums are where the educational
institutions is something that became a
kind of cosa lab let me put it that way
it's hard to believe but really museums
didn't see themselves as educational
institutions until we the last quarter
century so they moved in that direction
that's been a very positive thing and
then there was a move I want to say in
the 1990s for them to be see themselves
as entertainment entertainment
entertainment places right there's the
museum as an experience and that was
kind of coming out of the shell and then
especially starting in I'd say 1997 with
the opening of the Bilbao museum the
Guggenheim in Bilbao the idea that
museums have to be part of city branding
and city building really became a very
very very major trend now there is in
this book if you're if you're interested
we we give a whole lot of explanation of
the city building role of museums okay
so I wear my gun coming from I've talked
about how the growth of cities has
influenced museums how its influenced
museums to be something more than what
is it shop you know like what is this
weird object where did it come from
what date is that to being visitors
centered to becoming part of the
knowledge economy and now I just want to
focus very briefly on the role in city
building so you can read this faster
than I can say it but you can see that
they're placemaking after all what is
the city you know what is New York
without the people sitting at the steps
of the Metropolitan Museum of
right what is Toronto that's another
question we get to Toronto well get into
Toronto in the discussion period because
there's an issue with Toronto their
economic generators they generate jobs
right they generate money tourists come
they spend money they are choice
destinations they provide the kind of
cultural Commons a meeting place where
different aspects of society can meet
and that's a very fruitful they preserve
identities heritage memory that that's
very important especially in the face of
change and the book goes into all of
these in a lot of detail and they help
people adapt to change
museums are fascinating and the way they
actually can help us adapt to change and
that's also in the book but I want to
talk about this one today because I
think this is the great little dirty
secret okay and I'd like to see what you
think about it property values so here's
a property within five minutes of where
we're now seated it's the condo building
going up opposite the Royal Ontario
Museum on Bloor Street this condo
building take a look at what it says
this is the this is real it says
exclusive penthouses forever protected
views forever protected why are they
forever protected no view in Toronto
very few are forever protected because
there's more and more condos going up
but if you are in a building across from
the Royal Ontario Museum that is forever
protected nobody's going to build 15
stories on top of the Royal Ontario
Museum now I've been saying for quite a
long time that you know the wrong gets
no benefit from this the they maintain
their building some people like it some
people don't like it that's just a
matter of taste they have beautiful
property that they look after and they
keep it clean there were demonstrations
in front of the room all the time for
because of for other reasons not to do
if they're wrong but the roms busy
cleaning up afterwards and it may be
everything fine but the room itself gets
very little money from the City of
Toronto because we know the City of
Toronto has very little money and for
free sex purposes and it benefits not at
all from all the condos around it and
everybody who lives in those condos I
include myself not in this building but
in another one we do benefit and now
what's interesting is that over the
holidays
the New York Times ran an op IDI an
editorial saying people should pay for
their views and I am that that money
should go to support if it's a park or
the zoo or the wrong or frankly the
University of Toronto why not I mean
some of our tax money goes to pay for
the BIE
Business Improvement areas why not pop
pop you've covered exactly the right
moment why not why not pay why couldn't
that be a really good stream of income
for museums parks and cultural places so
this is my big campaign and I think that
I'm a small campaign because I'm trying
to get people interested in it and I
think it's well supported by economists
like Thomas Piketty you know the guy who
wrote capitalism in the 21st century he
goes on and on about this fact that the
real value as cities grow let's just
think about it's not just Toronto that's
growing it's not just New York that's
growing if every single city in the
world its cities in the its cities in
India its cities in the Pakistan it's
cities in Africa they're all growing
some of the biggest cities in the world
in fact are in Africa and where the
museum is the property values are the
highest that museum is paid for by tax
money and some private money whatever it
brings huge benefit the benefits go to
developers and owners the benefits are
realized over 40 50 year periods and I
believe that this is really the next
frontier for funding so museums have a
role in a city building they're
fulfilling their role pretty well
but I think that they deserve to have
some some support so here's a nice
little example of that yeah this is what
I just wanted I've never talked about
this before because it's kind of
something that everybody knows and
nobody wants to talk about so I thought
University University College this is a
place where we talk about things that
maybe people don't want to talk about in
polite society so this is Halifax
Halifax has just built the most fabulous
new library right and they the top floor
of that library they called the public
living room and this is the view of the
public living room is the one on top you
can see the Citadel and the water you
know this fabulous view but lo and
behold what is about to happen what's
about to happen and this is a he's taken
from a leaflet that was passed out
recently if there's going to be a
condominium built which will simply take
away the view and so far city council
doesn't care the councillors don't care
because we haven't established a kind of
concept of the right to of you and the
city's become more and more dense the
right to a view is actually very
important and it's these things so more
you know anyway you get the point I had
to put that in so I'm quoting Richard
Florida here um he wrote the
introduction to the book cities are
starting we're now coming back to how do
cities in so that was like a little coat
off to the side maybe just a little side
thing because we wanted to just come
back to the point of how cities in their
density and intensity are influencing
museums so cities the other thing about
cities is not just the growth it's not
just the property values it's the fact
that cities are becoming agents
themselves of soft power Joseph Nye a
professor at Harvard coined the phrase
soft power he has a you can get a daily
deluge of very interesting material from
from the soft power network it's all
about countries everyone knows that
countries wanted you know it what is it
Churchill said jaar jaar jaar is better
than war war war right so that's the
country aspect
but in the world of cities and city
power and city economic power cities are
doing a lot they're doing lots for
Refugees they're doing a lot for the
environment more cities cities were way
out ahead of countries on environmental
issues and passing environmental you
know my environmental frameworks and
ways to operate they're out there on
issues like transportation and they're
also out there on issues like culture so
the question is why are museums not more
prominently working with cities on all
these issues that's the question that we
try to do it in this book so um this is
a and I'm almost at the enemies I'm
worried about our time I don't know how
we're doing for time so yeah this isn't
a real university well there's no clock
um so so I wanted to give some positive
examples of how museums are working with
cities a to exercise soft power this is
from a wonderful program that Adrienne
Clarkson and John Ralston Hall saw have
on the it was part of these their
Institute for Canadian citizenship they
give away admissions to museums to new
immigrants new citizens actually to new
citizens what a great thing
the Toronto Public Library makes passes
to museums available and when those
passes become available I am told that
people arrive like it's 6:00 in the
morning to get them because people most
PM ago cannot afford to pay if you've
looked recently at what it cost to go to
the IOM or the AG Oh
so adapting to the change is is
something that is is is important but
isn't the museums that are doing this
it's really important to understand this
is the foundation this isn't what
museums out of the goodness of their
heart aren't saying gee we need to get
more recognized in Toronto other cities
yes not in Toronto we need to get more
new Canadians in here no they're not um
this is a great program at the VNA with
a during refugee week don't know if we
like that term but anyway they they got
the ID and I think it's brilliant is to
have after all collections of big
museums are from all over the world
people from Syria can tell us a lot
about what's in the wrong
you know and they can tell us in really
interesting ways but the VNA has
actually instituted that so they invite
new immigrants or refugees to come in
and take people on tours of the
collections and its really exciting but
museums are also great places to teach
English as a Second Language fantastic
places how much of that is going on
how much do museums open their doors to
our museum say if you're a teacher of
ESL there are tons of them in Toronto
many I shouldn't say times are they
admitted for free into the museum to
teach English as a Second Language I
don't believe them and this is my last
example I think you know my second last
Canadian one it's the new immigration
Museum in Halifax which clearly
foregrounds the role of refugees it's
it's a nice place we planned it you know
Human Rights Museum is us pier 21 it's
also us other museums of that of that
ilk shall we say kind of some people
might say ideological I I would say soft
power and then the last example I want
to give is Montreal the most unlikely
place Montreal Quebec historically has
not had the English tradition of museu G
that we had and as a result they're
inventing they're reinventing museums in
the most creative way and it's very
significant what they're doing I could
go on
that's a lecture in itself but I will
just point out that the Montreal Museum
of Fine Arts has just built this wing
which is called it's actually the Michel
and went out of Hornstein pavilion and
Peace Center the actual word piece is
part of it it would be a place for Regis
playing the museum's collections and
look what's interesting is quite big
visit Coates from them a powerful
message for peace a reflection of the
city they're there when was the last
time we saw that in Toronto from a major
museum I've never seen that and they've
done something I think a little I won't
say a little unusual which is that
they've said that that they've
identified public need remember I said
museums are now more visitor centered so
some of the needs that people have in
the community mental health very big and
and and so they have huge programs in
this museum related to mental health art
therapy using artists therapy most art
historians would be horrified with the
concept of artists therapy and an art
museum but I think it's very interesting
that they're doing it so just by way of
conclusion I'd say that right now it's a
moment of choice for museums is that do
they want to be in a soft power embrace
with cities or do they want to be
sleeping giants and I think that that's
a big choice for the next 15 years
[Applause]